---
title: Long-running Services in TorqueBox
author: Ben Browning
layout: news
---

We've already seen how to execute [asynchronous background
tasks][tasks] in TorqueBox. But what if our application needs a
persistent background daemon that's neither a scheduled job nor a
background task? Luckily, TorqueBox has a solution for this as well -
support for long-running Ruby Services will be in the upcoming
release-candidate.

[tasks]: /news/2011/01/07/clustered-tasks

To learn about TorqueBox Services, we'll create an IRC bot that runs
as a Service and communicates with our Rails 3 web interface via the
built-in messaging. Portions of the sample application will be
displayed inline and the entire source is available at
<https://github.com/torquebox/torquebox-irc-bot>.

# Add a Service to Our Application

Adding a Service only requires creating a services.yml and a class
with initialize, start, and stop methods. We're going to start with a
basic Rails 3 application but TorqueBox Services also work with Rails
2 and Rack applications.

Because our Service is an IRC bot and will communicate with the web
interface, we need to pull in gems for TorqueBox Messaging and for
connecting to IRC. Add the following lines to your Gemfile:

    gem "org.torquebox.torquebox-messaging-client"
    gem "bbrowning-ponder", :require => "ponder"

Then install the new gems with:

    $ jruby -S bundle install

Now let's add a config/services.yml containing the class of our
Service, IrcBotService, and the initialization parameters it needs.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/800711.js"></script>

<noscript>
    IrcBotService:
      nick: torquebox_bot
      server: irc.freenode.net
      port: 6667
      channel: '#torquebox'
</noscript>

And let's also add the referenced IrcBotService class under a new
app/services/ folder.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/800744.js"></script>

<noscript>
    class IrcBotService
      def initialize(options={})
        @nick = options['nick']
        @server = options['server']
        @port = options['port']
        @channel = options['channel']

        @messages = []
        @halt = false
      end

      def start
        @bot = configure_bot
        # Start the IRC bot and queue in separate threads
        @bot_thread = Thread.new { @bot.connect }
        @queue_thread = Thread.new { start_queue }
      end

      def stop
        # Disconnect from IRC
        @bot.quit
        # Notify our queue receiver to stop
        @halt = true
        # Wait for all spawned threads to exit
        @queue_thread.join
        @bot_thread.join
      end

      protected

      def configure_bot
        bot = Ponder::Thaum.new
        bot.configure do |c|
          c.nick = @nick
          c.server = @server
          c.port = @port
        end

        # Join requested channel
        bot.on :connect do
          bot.join @channel
        end

        # Log all channel messages to the queue
        bot.on :channel do |event_data|
          @messages << {
            :time => Time.now,
            :nick => event_data[:nick],
            :text => event_data[:message]
          }
          @messages.slice!(0) if @messages.length > 100
        end

        bot
      end

      def start_queue
        queue = TorqueBox::Messaging::Queue.new('/queues/irc_messages')
        queue.start

        while true do
          queue.receive_and_publish(:timeout => 500) do |request|
            @messages.select { |message| message[:time] > request[:since] }
          end

          # Jump out of the loop if we're shutting down
          if @halt
            queue.destroy
            break
          end
        end
      end

    end
</noscript>

The start method of IrcBotService gets called when our application is
deployed. The start method should return quickly so you'll want to do
the long-running work in a separate thread. Here we spawn two threads
since this Service needs to maintain a connection to IRC and listen
for new messages on a Queue.

When our application is undeployed the stop method gets called so we
can cleanly disconnect from IRC and stop listening for messages on the
Queue.

Finally, let's add a simple IrcController to retrieve the latest IRC
messages from our service and display them to the user.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/800781.js"></script>

<noscript>
    class IrcController < ApplicationController
      respond_to :html, :json

      def index
        # We want all IRC messages since the last one we saw
        # or since now if this is a new connection
        since = session[:last_seen] || Time.now

        # Ask the IRC bot for all new messages
        queue = TorqueBox::Messaging::Queue.new('/queues/irc_messages')
        messages = queue.publish_and_receive({:since => since}, :timeout => 2000) || []

        # Update the timestamp of the last seen message
        session[:last_seen] = messages.blank? ? since : messages.last[:time]

        # Convert each message from a hash into a text string for display
        @formatted_messages = messages.map do |message|
          "\#{message[:time].to_s(:short)} \#{message[:nick]}: \#{message[:text]}"
        end
        respond_with(@formatted_messages)
      end

    end
</noscript>

During the web request we synchronously ask the IrcBotService for the
latest messages with the `queue.publish_and_receive` method. The rest
of the code is just keeping track of which messages to display.

If you'd like to try out the IRC bot demo grab the latest code from
the [torquebox/torquebox-irc-bot][repo] GitHub repository - it
contains some javascript goodness and views not shown here to display
the IRC messages in near-real-time.

[repo]: https://github.com/torquebox/torquebox-irc-bot

TorqueBox Services are a really cool way to replace the external
daemons that Ruby applications seem to accumulate over time with
something that's integrated with the rest of the
application. [Download] the latest developer build, give them a try,
and I think you'll agree that TorqueBox Services are far easier than
managing an external process.

[download]: /download
